CARE ETHICS: HOW TO USE THE CARE LENS
-------------------------------------

To apply the care lens, you must consider the six major aspects of care. You must consider how they
apply to a situation in which multiple parties are involved in some ethical, philosophical, or other
quandary. They are interrelated and can be thought of as a pyramid; successive aspects build on each
other. The most fundamental aspects are presented first in the following order:

1. relationships: This aspect describes how each party is affected by its relationships with other
parties; care ethics derives moral significance from the most fundamental aspects of human
relationships. Key questions to answer include: What relationships exist between the parties? In what ways are
they morally significant?
2. needs: This aspect describes what each party needs, as much on the physiological level as on the
psychological and emotional levels. It is important to know what each party needs to determine how
they can or do care for each other. Key questions to answer include: What does each party need?
3. attentiveness: This aspect describes each party's awareness of the others' needs. If the parties
are aware of each other's needs, they are empowered to care for each other. Key questions to answer include:
How might each party be aware of, or ignorant to, each other's needs?
4. responsibility: This aspect describes each party's willingness to care for the others' needs.
Before caring for another person, one must be willing to do so. Key questions to answer include: Is each party
willing to respond to and take care of the others' needs? If not, why? How might they become willing
under changing circumstances?
5. competence: This aspect describes each party's fundamental capacity for caring for each other's
needs, beyond their base awareness of those needs. To be care for another person, one must be able
to care for them, whether physically, mentally, emotionally, or otherwise. Key questions to answer include:
Is each party capable of providing good and successful care to each other's needs?
6. responsiveness: This aspect describes each party's awareness of the others' positions, and how
responsive a party is to the others' needs based on that awareness, and in general. Key questions to answer
include: How might each party consider others' positions from the other's point of view? how might
they recognize potential for abuse in care?

Human dependence on others is universal. However, not every dependency (relationship) is necessary
or good. Care ethics is concerned with what is required for relationships to be healthy, reciprocal,
and caring, rather than abusive, exploitative, or unfair. By addressing the six major aspects of
care, as listed previously, and understanding how they relate to one another, you can apply the
ethical lens of care to novel situations and make ethical decisions based on the understanding you
gain through the lens. To be truly successful, though, you must incorporate other ethical
perspectives into your decision-making, as care ethics cannot fully account for issues such as
justice.