COMMON GOOD ETHICS: HOW TO USE THE COMMON GOOD LENS
---------------------------------------------------

To apply the common good lens, you must consider the five major aspects of common good ethics. You
must consider how they apply to a situation in which multiple parties are involved in some ethical,
philosophical, or other quandary. Common good ethics is concerned with what is best for the common
good; namely, what general conditions are to the advantage of each party. To determine what
conditions best support and/or contribute to the common good, you must apply the following five
aspects of common good ethics, which build upon each other in the following order:

1. general conditions: This aspect describes what conditions would be to the advantage of all
parties. Key questions to answer include: What general conditions would be to all parties' advantage?
2. particular conditions: This aspect describes what conditions would be to the advantage of
particular parties, but that may still support the common good. Key questions to answer include: What
particular conditions would be to the advantage of each party?
3. ubiquitous goods: This aspect describes the goods that all parties can access -- namely, what
common goods exist in a particular situation. Key questions to answer include: What goods can all parties
access?
4. benefits: This aspect describes the potential benefits associated with maintaining whatever
goods and/or conditions may support or contribute to the common good. Key questions to answer
include: How might each party benefit by maintaining those goods and conditions that all parties
can access and benefit from?
5. costs: This aspect describes the potential costs associated with maintaining whatever goods
and/or conditions may support or contribute to the common good. Key questions to answer include:
What costs might each party bear to maintain those goods/conditions that all parties can access &
benefit from? Is the good or condition worth maintaining for the benefits it provides, given the
costs?

Common goods are by definition universally available and universally beneficial. Establishing and
maintaining the common good requires the cooperation of some, often many, people, but they all
benefit from the goods they derive from such cooperation. However, the costs of maintaining the
common conditions and goods that all parties benefit from may be distributed unequally. Uneven costs
may lead to resistance by those parties which bear the highest or most disproportionate costs, which
jeopardizes the condition or good in question. To address such issues, you must incorporate other
ethical perspectives into your worldview.