HOW TO APPLY THE FRAMEWORK FOR ETHICAL DECISION-MAKING
------------------------------------------------------

To make ethical decisions, you must consider the six essential lenses of ethical decision-making.
You must consider how they apply to a situation in which multiple parties are involved in some
ethical, philosophical, or other quandary. Making good ethical decisions requires a trained
sensitivity to ethical issues and a practiced method for exploring the ethical aspects of a decision
and weighing the considerations that should impact our choice of a course of action. To discover
what ought to be done, address the following interrelated lenses:

1. rights: Some suggest that the ethical action is the one that best protects and respects the moral
rights of those affected. Rights are also often understood as implying duties —- in particular, the
duty to respect others' rights and dignity. Key questions to answer include: What rights do people in
general possess? How do those rights apply to each party? How can those rights best be respected?
2. justice: Justice is the idea that each person should be given their due, and what people are due
is often interpreted as fair or equal treatment. Equal treatment implies that people should be
treated as equals according to some defensible standard such as merit or need, but not necessarily
that everyone should be treated in the exact same way in every respect. Key questions to answer
include: What does each party deserve according to principles of justice & fairness? What
dependencies exist between them? How might those dependencies be threatened by an unfair/inequitable
solution?
3. utilitarianism: Some ethicists begin by asking, “How will this action impact everyone affected?”
—- emphasizing the consequences of our actions. Utilitarianism, a results-based approach, says that
the ethical action is the one that produces the greatest balance of good over harm for as many
stakeholders as possible. It requires an accurate determination of the likelihood of a particular
result and its impact. Key questions to answer include: What courses of action are available? How
could they benefit and/or harm the affected parties? What action produces the best net consequences
based on its potential benefits/harms?
4. common good: According to the common good approach, life in community is a good in itself and our
actions should contribute to that life. Unlike the utilitarian lens, which sums up and aggregates
goods for every individual, the common good lens highlights mutual concern for the shared interests
of all members of a community. Key questions to answer include: What general conditions would be to
all parties' advantage? What goods can all parties access? What sorts of costs and benefits would
each party incur by maintaining those goods/conditions?
5. virtues: A very ancient approach to ethics argues that ethical actions ought to be consistent with
certain ideal virtues that provide for the full development of our humanity. These virtues are
dispositions and habits that enable us to act according to the highest potential of our character and
on behalf of values like truth and beauty. Key questions to answer include: What virtues should each
party exhibit? How can each party act on those virtues? In what ways does each party fail to
exemplify virtuous behavior, and how could they improve?
6. care: Care ethics is rooted in relationships and in the need to listen and respond to individuals
in their specific circumstances, rather than merely following rules or calculating utility. It relies
on empathy to gain a deep appreciation of the interest, feelings, and viewpoints of each stakeholder.
Care ethics holds that options for resolution must account for the relationships, concerns, and
feelings of all stakeholders. Key questions to answer include: What relationships exist between the
parties? How are they morally significant? Does each party have the awareness, willingness, and
capabilities necessary to care for one another?

When responding to an ethical dilemma, you must use the lenses previously listed to aid in decision-
making. In particular, follow this pipeline to make an ethical decision: First, identify the ethical
issues at stake. Second, get the facts about this particular case. Finally, evaluate a variety of
potential actions using all lenses, and determine which action is the best to take in the situation.