JUSTICE ETHICS: HOW TO USE THE JUSTICE LENS
-------------------------------------------

To apply the justice lens, you must consider the five major aspects of justice ethics. You must
consider how they apply to a situation in which multiple parties are involved in some ethical,
philosophical, or other quandary. Issues of justice and fairness arise when goods and/or services are
scarce and people differ over who should get what. Addressing the five major aspects of justice
ethics will allow you to better legislate issues of justice and fairness. The aspects are
interrelated and build on each other in the following order:

1. conflicts of interest: This aspect describes how the scarcity of goods and services gives rise to
disagreement between parties. Key questions to answer include: What conflicts of interest might exist
or arise due to the relative scarcity of goods and/or services? How might each party disagree over
who gets what?
2. dignity: This aspect describes each party's dignity, which relates to just treatment. Key
questions to answer include: How can each party recognize & maintain each other's dignity?
3. dependencies: This aspect desribes the dependent relationships between parties. Parties must
treat each other as equals to avoid introducing instability into the network of relationships that
unite them and the rest of society. Key questions to answer include: How do the parties depend on one
another?
4. instability: This aspect describes how injust solutions or situations may threaten the stability
of the dependencies between the parties. Key questions to answer include: How might the stability of
the dependencies be threatened by an unjust solution?
5. distribution: This aspect describes how the scarce goods and/or services in questions should be
distributed. Key questions to answer include: How should the relatively scarce goods/services in
question be distributed according to principles of fairness & equity?

Justice is concerned with giving each party what they deserve. The foundations of justice can be
traced to the notions of social stability, interdependence, and equal dignity. Justice is an
expression of our mutual recognition of each other's basic dignity, and an acknowledgement that if we
are to live together in an interdependent community we must treat each other as equals. The
dependencies that arise between humans are inevitable and cannot be fully dealt with using the
ethical lens of justice. Therefore, it is necessary that you incorporate other ethical perspectives
such as care ethcis into your decision-making.