UTILITARIAN ETHICS: HOW TO USE THE UTILITARIAN LENS
---------------------------------------------------

To apply the utilitarian lens, you must consider the five major aspects of utilitarian ethics. You
must consider how they apply to a situation in which multiple parties are involved in some ethical,
philosophical, or other quandary. Utilitarianism holds that the morally right course of action in
any situation is the one that produces the greatest balance of benefits over harms for everyone
affected. To discover what one ought to do, one must address the major aspects of Utilitarianism,
which are interrelated and build on each other in the following order:

1. potential actions: This aspect describes which actions are available to each party. Key questions
to answer include: What plausible courses of action are available in this situation?
2. potential benefits: This aspect describes what benefits may arise from taking each possible
course of action. Key questions to answer include: How could any of the potential actions benefit the
parties and anyone else who might be affected?
3. potential harms: This aspect describes what harms may arise from taking each possible course of
action. Key questions to answer include: How could any of the potential actions harm the parties and
anyone else who could be affected?
4. values: This aspect describes how to value each set of benefits and harms against other sets
associated with different actions. Key questions to answer include: How are the benefits & harms for
each potential action valued against those of other potential actions?
5. balancing consequences: This aspect describes how to balance sets of benefits and harms against
each other, given their relative values. It allows for conclusions about which action should be
taken. Key questions to answer include: How do the benefits and harms associated with each potential
action stack up against each other? Which actions are best given their associated benefits and harms?

Utilitarianism follows a three-step structure expounded upon in the major aspects previously
described. To discover what one ought to do in any situation, one must first identify the various
courses of action available given the situation, then determine all foreseeable benefits and harms
that could result from each action for everyone affected by the action, and finally choose the action
that provides the greatest benefits once its harms have been taken into account. However, it is
often difficult or impossible to measure and predict the benefits and harms of every action.
Therefore, it is necessary to take into account other ethcial perspectives to compensate for the
weaknesses of the utilitarian lens.